Add chapter on the system module and its macros. (#249)
amzn/ion-docs: src/system-module.adoc

[[sec:sysmod]]
== The System Module

include::styles.adoc[]

> The symbols and macros of the system module `$ion` is available everywhere within an Ion document,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The symbols and macros of the system module `$ion` are available everywhere within an Ion document,
```

with the version of that module being determined by the spec-version of each segment.

The specific system symbols are largely uninteresting to users since they don't affect the text

> content that they interact with.

Reviewer: Just as an aside, I've seen `name` (`$4`) in the wild quite a bit.

Author: Do you mean users have written `$4` rather than `name`?

Would you like more or different text here?  I admit its not the most clear sentence around...

Reviewer: > Do you mean users have written $4 rather than name?

No, I just mean that `name` appears as a field name frequently and so gets encoded as `$4`. It doesn't change the thrust of what you're saying, it's just the most common way for users to interact with the system symbol table apart from LSTs.

> Would you like more or different text here? I admit its not the most clear sentence around...

Maybe:
```suggestion
The specific system symbols are largely uninteresting to users; while the binary encoding heavily leverages the system symbol table, the text encoding that users typically interact with does not.
```
?

Author: That's great! Thanks!

writing macros.

=== Primitive Operators

This section describes operators that cannot be defined as macros.

==== Stream Constructors

===== `void`

[{nrm}]
----
(void) \-> any?
----

Produces an empty stream.
The most common use of this operator is to supply “no value” to a voidable parameter.
To make such use more readable, the special-case E-expression `(:)` is synonymous to `(:void)`.

===== `values`

[{nrm}]
----
(values (v any\...)) \-> any*
----

Produces a stream from any number of arguments, concatenating the streams produced by the nested
expressions.
Used to aggregate multiple values or sub-streams to pass to a single argument, or to return
multiple results. Generally only useful with more than one subexpression.

==== Value Constructors

===== `make_string`

[{nrm}]
----
(make_string (content text\...)) \-> string
----

Produces a non-null, unannotated string containing the concatenated content produced by the
arguments. Nulls and annotations are discarded.

TODO Probably useful to allow some other Ion scalars (at least) to allow type conversion.
I think this would be most useful for ints, since the binary representation is more compact than

> as characters. Lobs wouldn’t work well, though.

Reviewer: > I think this would be most useful for ints, since the binary representation is more compact than
as characters.

I'm not sure I followed this. `(make_string 500)` would be going in the wrong direction, wouldn't it?

Author: Let's see... in binary the macro variant takes 2 bytes for the system-macro invocation, 3 bytes for the integer.  Versus 4(?) bytes for the 3-character string.  So yeah, not a win for small numbers, but larger numbers should have an increasing advantage, no?

That said, what I had in mind was more along the lines of inserting a variable number into a fixed string, along the lines of the traditional ASIN to URL macro.

#255

Reviewer: > Let's see... in binary the macro variant takes 2 bytes for the system-macro invocation, 3 bytes for the integer. Versus 4(?) bytes for the 3-character string. So yeah, not a win for small numbers, but larger numbers should have an increasing advantage, no?

I see, so anywhere you would have written `"7000000"` you could instead invoke a macro that was equivalent to `(make_string 7000000)` to save space. Yep, that checks out.

> That said, what I had in mind was more along the lines of inserting a variable number into a fixed string, along the lines of the traditional ASIN to URL macro.

This is a compelling use case!

===== `make_symbol`

[{nrm}]
----
(make_symbol (content text\...)) \-> symbol
----

Like `make_string` but produces a symbol.

===== `make_list`

[{nrm}]
----
(make_list (vals any\...)) \-> list
----

Produces a non-null, unannotated list from any number of inputs.
Template expressions of the form `[E~1~, …, E~n~]` are equivalent to `(make_list E~1~ … E~n~)`.

===== `make_sexp`

[{nrm}]
----
(make_sexp (vals any\...)) \-> sexp
----

> Like make_list but produces a sexp.

Reviewer: Possibly worth mentioning that this (and `literal`) are how one makes a `sexp` in the TDL?

[{nrm}]
----
(:make_sexp)      ⇒ ()
(:make_sexp null) ⇒ (null)
----

===== `make_struct`

[{nrm}]
----
(make_struct (kv any\...)) \-> struct
----

Produces a non-null, unannotated struct from any number of elements.
The ``kv``s are processed in order, incrementally adding fields to an initially-empty struct.
Various forms of ``kv``s are allowed:

* A (non-null) string or symbol is treated as a field name, and MUST be followed by another value

> to comprise a key-value pair in the result. Annotations on the field name are discarded.

Reviewer: Just checking, do we ignore annotations in other places too (vs error)? e.g. in the arguments for `make_string` and `annotate`?

Author: It's a bit inconsistent. #254

* A (non-null) struct is merged into the result as-is, after discarding annotations.
* Any other type of value evokes an expansion error.

Template expressions of the form `{T~1~:E~1~, …, T~n~:E~n~}` are equivalent to
`(make_struct (*literal* T~1~) E~1~ … (*literal* T~n~) E~n~)`, assuming that no expression E
produces more than one value.
In that case, the `make_struct` variant would misbehave: the second value produced by E would be

> treated as the next key.

Reviewer: An example (or TODO for one) would probably help here.

===== `make_decimal`

[{nrm}]
----
(make_decimal (coefficient int) (exponent int)) \-> decimal
----

> Since decimal is already compact, this is perhaps most useful in conjunction with packed arrays.

Reviewer: Also when the exponent is often the same and can be baked into a macro.

TODO if the coefficient were decimal, this could re-scale values. Useful?

===== `make_float` ❓

[{nrm}]
----
(make_float ieee) \-> float
----

Included for completeness, but of unclear utility.

> TODO coerce an int or decimal to float?  Perhaps useful to use fixed-width ints to encode various float widths? This may not be useable to convert “IEEE bits” to float, since they would be converted to int before arriving here.

Reviewer: I've always thought it would be for converting `int` to a `float`, especially small ones. (Maybe `decimal`? That one feels less clear.)

Author: I've cut #252 to track this (and will link from the doc)

===== `make_timestamp`

[{nrm}]
----
(make_timestamp

>   (year int) (month int) (day int?)

Reviewer: Month is `?` too, right?

Author: yep 😣

  (hour int?)  (minute int?) (second decimal?)
  (offset int?))
  -> timestamp
----
Produces a non-null, unannotated timestamp at various levels of precision.
When `offset` is absent, the result has unknown local offset; offset `0` denotes UTC.

TODO Reconsider offset semantics, perhaps default should be UTC.

Example:

[{nrm}]
----
(*macro* ts_today
  \((hour uint8) (minute uint8) (seconds_millis uint32))
  (make_timestamp 2022 04 28 hour minute
    (decimal seconds_millis -3) 0))
----

===== `annotate`

[{nrm}]
----
(annotate (ann [text]*) value) \-> any
----

Produces the `value` prefixed with the annotations ``ann``s.

> Each `ann` must be a non-null, unannotated string or symbol.

Reviewer: Here we require 'unannotated' while we ignore annotations elsewhere.

Author: Good call-out.  Now that you mention it, I feel icky about ignoring annotations.  That seems likely to lead to users of the macro being surprised by data-loss.

We could use a written-down design principle on this sort of thing, as well as related topics like handling of nulls (typed, untyped, and mis-typed).  #254

[{nrm}]
----
(:annotate ["a2"] a1::true) => a2::a1::true
----

=== Derived Operators

These operators can be defined in terms of the primitives, using the macro language.

==== Symbol Table Management

===== Local Symtab Declaration

This macro is optimized for representing symbols-list with minimal space.

[{nrm}]
----
(*macro* import
  \((name *string*) (version uint**?**) (max_id uint**?**)) \-> struct
  { name:name, version:version, max_id:max_id })

(*macro* local_symtab
  \((imports [import]) (symbols string**\...**))
  $ion_symbol_table::{
    imports:(*if_void* imports (void) [imports]),
    symbols:(*if_void* symbols (void) [symbols]),
  })
----

[{nrm}]
----
(:local_symtab [("my.symtab" 4)] "newsym" "another")
  =>
  $ion_symbol_table::{ imports:[{name:"my.symtab", version:4}],
                       symbols:["newsym", "another"] }
----

===== Local Symtab Appending

[{nrm}]
----
(*macro* lst_append
  \((symbols string\...))
  (*if_void* symbols

>     (void)                  // Produce nothing if no symbols provided.

Reviewer: Nice.
